for-teachers.md, before:

## For Educators

Would you like to use this curriculum in your classroom? Please feel free!

In fact, you can use it within GitHub itself by using GitHub Classroom.

To do that, fork this repo. You are going to need to create a repo for each lesson, so you're going to need to extract each folder into a separate repo. That way, [GitHub Classroom](https://classroom.github.com/classrooms) can pick up each lesson separately. 

These [full instructions](https://github.blog/2020-03-18-set-up-your-digital-classroom-with-github-classroom/) will give you an idea how to set up your classroom.

## Using it in Moodle, Canvas or Blackboard

This curriculum works well in these Learning Management Systems! Use the [Moodle upload file](/teaching-files/webdev-moodle.mbz) for the full content, or try the [Common Cartridge file](/teaching-files/webdev-common-cartridge.imscc) which contains some of the content. Moodle Cloud does not support full Common Cartridge exports, so it is preferable to use the Moodle download file which can be uploaded into Canvas. Please let us know how we can improve this experience.

## Using the repo as is

If you would like to use this repo as it currently stands, without using GitHub Classroom, that can be done as well. You would need to communicate with your students which lesson to work through together.

In an online format (Zoom, Teams, or other) you might form breakout rooms for the quizzes, and mentor students to help them get ready to learn. Then invite students to for the quizzes and submit their answers as 'issues' at a certain time. You might do the same with assignments, if you want students to work collaboratively out in the open.

If you prefer a more private format, ask your students to fork the curriculum, lesson by lesson, to their own GitHub repos as private repos, and give you access. Then they can complete quizzes and assignments privately and submit them to you via issues on your classroom repo.

There are many ways to make this work in an online classroom format. Please let us know what works best for you!

## Please give us your thoughts!

We want to make this curriculum work for you and your students. Please give us [feedback](https://forms.microsoft.com/Pages/ResponsePage.aspx?id=v4j5cvGGr0GRqy180BHbR2humCsRZhxNuI79cm6n0hRUQzRVVU9VVlU5UlFLWTRLWlkyQUxORTg5WS4u).

Commit message:

adding images for Moodle and Canvas

for-teachers.md, after:

## For Educators

Would you like to use this curriculum in your classroom? Please feel free!

In fact, you can use it within GitHub itself by using GitHub Classroom.

To do that, fork this repo. You are going to need to create a repo for each lesson, so you're going to need to extract each folder into a separate repo. That way, [GitHub Classroom](https://classroom.github.com/classrooms) can pick up each lesson separately. 

These [full instructions](https://github.blog/2020-03-18-set-up-your-digital-classroom-with-github-classroom/) will give you an idea how to set up your classroom.

## Using it in Moodle, Canvas or Blackboard

This curriculum works well in these Learning Management Systems! Use the [Moodle upload file](/teaching-files/webdev-moodle.mbz) for the full content, or try the [Common Cartridge file](/teaching-files/webdev-common-cartridge.imscc) which contains some of the content. Moodle Cloud does not support full Common Cartridge exports, so it is preferable to use the Moodle download file which can be uploaded into Canvas. Please let us know how we can improve this experience.

![Moodle](/teaching-files/moodle.png)
> The curriculum in a Moodle classroom

![Canvas](/teaching-files/canvas.png)
> The curriculum in Canvas

## Using the repo as is

If you would like to use this repo as it currently stands, without using GitHub Classroom, that can be done as well. You would need to communicate with your students which lesson to work through together.

In an online format (Zoom, Teams, or other) you might form breakout rooms for the quizzes, and mentor students to help them get ready to learn. Then invite students to for the quizzes and submit their answers as 'issues' at a certain time. You might do the same with assignments, if you want students to work collaboratively out in the open.

If you prefer a more private format, ask your students to fork the curriculum, lesson by lesson, to their own GitHub repos as private repos, and give you access. Then they can complete quizzes and assignments privately and submit them to you via issues on your classroom repo.

There are many ways to make this work in an online classroom format. Please let us know what works best for you!

## Please give us your thoughts!

We want to make this curriculum work for you and your students. Please give us [feedback](https://forms.microsoft.com/Pages/ResponsePage.aspx?id=v4j5cvGGr0GRqy180BHbR2humCsRZhxNuI79cm6n0hRUQzRVVU9VVlU5UlFLWTRLWlkyQUxORTg5WS4u).
