quiz-app/README.md, before:

# Quiz app

These quizzes are the pre- and post-lecture quizzes for the data science curriculum at https://aka.ms/webdev-beginners

## Run the Quiz App locally

### Prerequisites

- A GitHub account
- [Node.js and Git](https://nodejs.org/)

### Install & Setup

1. Create a repository from this [template](https://github.com/new?template_name=Web-Dev-For-Beginners&template_owner=microsoft) 

1. Clone your new repository, and navigate to the quiz-app

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-github-organization/repo-name
   cd repo-name/quiz-app
   ```

1. Install the npm packages & dependencies

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

### Build the app

1. To build the solution, run:

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

### Start the App

1. To run the solution, run:

    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

### [Optional] Linting

1. To ensure the code is linted, run:

    ```bash
    npm run lint
    ```

## Deploy the Quiz-app to Azure 

### Prerequisites
- An Azure Subscription. _Cost Estimate: FREE_

[![Deploy to Azure](https://aka.ms/deploytoazurebutton)](https://portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.StaticApp)

Once you are signed in on Azure through the link above, select a subscription and resource group then:

- Static Web App details: Provide a name and select a hosting plan
- GitHub Login: Set your deployment source as GitHub then log in and fill in the required fields on the form:
    - *Organization* – Choose your organization.
    - *Repository* – Select the Web Dev for Beginners curriculum repository. 
    - *Branch* - Select a branch (main) 
- Build Presets - Azure Static Web Apps uses a detection algorithm to detect the framework used in your application. 
    - *App location* - ./quiz-app
    - *Api location* -
    - *Output location* - dist
- Deployment: Click 'Review + Create', then 'Create'
- Post-Deployment: After deployment is complete, click on 'Go to Deployment' then 'View app in browser'.

### Example Workflow File

Here’s an example of what the GitHub Actions workflow file might look like:
name: Azure Static Web Apps CI/CD
```
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
  pull_request:
    types: [opened, synchronize, reopened, closed]
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build_and_deploy_job:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Build and Deploy Job
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      - name: Build And Deploy
        id: builddeploy
        uses: Azure/static-web-apps-deploy@v1
        with:
          azure_static_web_apps_api_token: ${{ secrets.AZURE_STATIC_WEB_APPS_API_TOKEN }}
          repo_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          action: "upload"
          app_location: "quiz-app" # App source code path
          api_location: ""API source code path optional
          output_location: "dist" #Built app content directory - optional
```

Once your GitHub Action is executed successfully, refresh the live page to view your application.

Commit message:

Added instructions for adding a translated quiz set

quiz-app/README.md, after:

# Quiz app

These quizzes are the pre- and post-lecture quizzes for the data science curriculum at https://aka.ms/webdev-beginners

## Adding a translated quiz set

Add a quiz translation by creating matching quiz structures in the `assets/translations` folders. The canonical quizzes are in `assets/translations/en`. The quizzes are broken into several groupings. Make sure to align the numbering with the proper quiz section. There are 40 quizzes total in this curriculum, with the count starting at 0.

After editing the translations, edit the index.js file in the translation folder to import all the files following the conventions in `en`.

Edit the `index.js` file in `assets/translations` to import the new translated files.

Then, edit the dropdown in `App.vue` in this app to add your language. Match the localized abbreviation to the folder name for your language.

Finally, edit all the quiz links in the translated lessons, if they exist, to include this localization as a query parameter: `?loc=fr` for example.

## Run the Quiz App locally

### Prerequisites

- A GitHub account
- [Node.js and Git](https://nodejs.org/)

### Install & Setup

1. Create a repository from this [template](https://github.com/new?template_name=Web-Dev-For-Beginners&template_owner=microsoft) 

1. Clone your new repository, and navigate to the quiz-app

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-github-organization/repo-name
   cd repo-name/quiz-app
   ```

1. Install the npm packages & dependencies

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

### Build the app

1. To build the solution, run:

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

### Start the App

1. To run the solution, run:

    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

### [Optional] Linting

1. To ensure the code is linted, run:

    ```bash
    npm run lint
    ```

## Deploy the Quiz-app to Azure 

### Prerequisites
- An Azure Subscription. _Cost Estimate: FREE_

[![Deploy to Azure](https://aka.ms/deploytoazurebutton)](https://portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.StaticApp)

Once you are signed in on Azure through the link above, select a subscription and resource group then:

- Static Web App details: Provide a name and select a hosting plan
- GitHub Login: Set your deployment source as GitHub then log in and fill in the required fields on the form:
    - *Organization* – Choose your organization.
    - *Repository* – Select the Web Dev for Beginners curriculum repository. 
    - *Branch* - Select a branch (main) 
- Build Presets - Azure Static Web Apps uses a detection algorithm to detect the framework used in your application. 
    - *App location* - ./quiz-app
    - *Api location* -
    - *Output location* - dist
- Deployment: Click 'Review + Create', then 'Create'
- Post-Deployment: After deployment is complete, click on 'Go to Deployment' then 'View app in browser'.

### Example Workflow File

Here’s an example of what the GitHub Actions workflow file might look like:
name: Azure Static Web Apps CI/CD
```
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
  pull_request:
    types: [opened, synchronize, reopened, closed]
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build_and_deploy_job:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Build and Deploy Job
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      - name: Build And Deploy
        id: builddeploy
        uses: Azure/static-web-apps-deploy@v1
        with:
          azure_static_web_apps_api_token: ${{ secrets.AZURE_STATIC_WEB_APPS_API_TOKEN }}
          repo_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          action: "upload"
          app_location: "quiz-app" # App source code path
          api_location: ""API source code path optional
          output_location: "dist" #Built app content directory - optional
```

Once your GitHub Action is executed successfully, refresh the live page to view your application.
